Research Framework
Overview 

Assessment of neurological outcomes in comatose cardiac arrest (CA) survivors due to post-anoxic coma remains a persistent challenge in clinical practice. These patients are treated with mechanical ventilation and sedation in the intensive care unit (ICU) demanding substantial additional medical resources due to their complex care requirements. Continuing or withdrawing treatment based on multimodal prognostication using clinical, neurophysiological, biochemical markers and neuroimag- ing is a daunting task for clinicians. Since the brain is the most vulnerable organ in CA, and severe brain injury remains the primary cause of death, thus monitoring of the brain function for prognostication purposes is of paramount importance. Electroencephalogram (EEG), either continuously or at specified time points, give the best direct access to the current brain function and the present seda- tion effects. However, the crucial differentiation between reversible sedation effects (affecting EEGs) and irreversible brain damage is a huge problem. In addition, the other prognostic markers also lack sensitivity and specificity, thereby leaving a significant portion of patients in uncertain prognostic grey areas. This underscores the imperative need to develop standardized rule-based assessment schemes with improved reliability to enhance prediction outcomes by mitigating uncertainty. This project aims to enhance neurological prognosis, and reduce uncertainty and ethical dilemmas in treating comatose survivors of CA by improving reliability of EEG assessments. To achieve this, we will develop multi-grading rule-based AI algorithms (see Figure below) that predict neurophysiological outcomes from heterogeneous longitudinal EEG data. These algorithms will: 1) identify discernible patterns that can distinguish highly malignant EEG patterns (HMEP) associated with sedation from those indicative of irreversible post-anoxic brain damage; 2) incorporate clinical and biochemical prognostic indicators to assess whether they further improve EEG-based outcome prediction; and 3) differentiate EEG patterns between likely awakeners and non-awakeners. Better prognostication holds the potential to markedly improve care and ethical decision-making among comatose CA survivors. Enabling tailored treatments can optimize resource allocation, curtails healthcare expenses, and mitigate premature withdrawal of life-sustaining therapy (WLST) by reducing the impact of the game of chance through self-fulfilling prophecies.


Research Objective

Design a multi-grading rule-based EEG assessment scheme to identify markers of HMEP, controlling for sedative effects.
Extend multi-grading rule-based EEG assessment scheme for multi-modal scenarios using a model combining clinical variables like GCS, brain stem reflexes, EEG pattern recognition, and NSE levels. Further, the reliability of EEG assessments for neuro prognostication is investigated with the AI-based multimodal approaches.
Test feasibility of prospective study where early WLST is avoided while time-series assessment of EEG patterns after sedation-withdrawal are added, and predictions are kept blinded to the treatment team (similar to the previous NORCAST trial with a different TTM- and sedation regimen). Further, design an AI framework that makes predictions over time, which are phrased in terms of either time- to-event outcomes (time-to-awakening/ non-awakening) across multiple time horizons (e.g., within the next 24, 48, or 72 hours).

AI-Powered Analysis
The annotated EEGs are used to develop three AI-based models: two for binary classification and one for four-class categorization. The first binary classification model determines whether the patient is sedated or not, while the second distinguishes between highly malignant and benign conditions. The third model is a four-class categorization system that classifies EEG data into one of four categories: non-sedated/non-malignant, sedated/non-malignant, non-sedated/highly malignant, and sedated/highly malignant. Transformer networks (TNs) with attention mechanisms (AMs) have recently become prominent in natural language processing, largely due to their scalability and their ability to build attention maps that identify correlations between words (tokens). Their versatility and robustness have led to their adaptation in various advanced applications, including ChatGPT. Given these strengths, TNs present an intriguing avenue for further exploration of time-series EEG data, as they can be leveraged to uncover complex patterns and relationships both within individual EEG channels (intra-channel) and between different channels (inter-channel). In our approach, we will segment EEG recordings into n-second windows, transforming these segments into tokens. This allows our customized TN to process the data and build an attention maps. Tokenization of segments facilitates TN to identify complex correlations within the EEG signals. To capture the complex relationships within EEG data, the AM can be customized to focus on both local and global interactions. This involves creating a multi-head AM of TN where different heads are designed to analyze localized patterns within adjacent segments as well as broader patterns across multiple segments. Additionally, considering that EEG data are collected from multiple channels (electrodes), the AM can be tailored to emphasize inter-channel relationships, allowing the model to prioritize and learn from the most informative channels for specific neurological conditions.
Clinical Impact 
This research project aligns with Goal 1 of the research strategy of OUS for 2021-2025 [18] i.e., “Implement new models for clinical trials that take developments in personalised medicine into account, and include more interdisciplinary aspects in clinical trials.” Furthermore it aligns with Goal 3 i.e., “Facilitate the development and use of high-performance computing, including artificial intelligence, in both clinical research and translational research and also as a treatment tool.”, emphasizing multi- disciplinary research for comprehensive data analysis that can contribute to the quality enhancement of public health. Early prognosis through reliable prediction of EEG assessments and time-to- awakening in comatose patients after CA carries significant clinical and scientific impacts: 
From a clinical perspective, an accurate early prognosis can enhance patient care by guiding clinicians in tailoring treatments to individual needs. This can optimize resource allocation and minimize harm by preventing premature WLST, reducing healthcare costs, ensuring ethical decision-making, and improving crucial discussions with close relatives. 
On the scientific front, this project holds significant potential to advance traditional machine and DL analysis to create a robust prognostic estimation tool with increased certainty towards neurological outcomes among comatose CA survivors. Developing sophisticated algorithms for interpreting EEG data can transform clinical decision-making, offering new insights into the intricate dynamics of post-anoxic coma.
