WP3: Feasibility of using serial EEGs (after terminated sedation) to improve differentiation
of sedation from established brain damage - A prospective study in the ICU; Leader: Sunde;
Contributors: Lundqvist, Andersen, Qadir, Nesaragi; Personnel: Postdoc, Ph.D., Soft. Developer
Aims and Objectives: Collection of serial EEGs time-locked to termination of sedation and through-
out the awakening process. Clinical data on awakening, sedation level, and prognostic predictors will
be collected in parallel.
Task 3.1: Study Design and Feasibility Evaluation
A project-specific dataset will be established prospectively over one year in the ICU with daily EEGs
collected in comatose CA survivors until the patient is either awake or dead. In addition to EEGs,
detailed medication data will be collected by access to the ICU’s electronic clinical information sys-
tem. Other prognostic markers will be collected (NSE, GCS, daily brainstem reflexes, SSEP, and
brain CT/MRI when available). The EEGs will be assessed using the algorithms developed in WP1,2.
Results of the daily EEGs performed as part of the study will be blinded to the treating physicians
except for evidence of ongoing epileptic activity. Routine EEGs performed on clinical indication will,
of course, not be blinded. Based on ICU admission data and our experience from the NORCAST we
suggest it to be possible to collect serial EEG data from 20-30 patients in one year. With a mean of
5 serial EEGs per patient this will give 100-150 EEGs.
Feasibility evaluation is performed by qualitative and quantitative research design aiming to address
feasibility for safe implementation of AI. Qualitative retrospective focus group interviews of ICU physi-
cians and attending staff will answer the question of whether the rule-based serial EEG assessment
has the potential to affect physicians’ trust and confidence to prognostic evaluations. The logistics and
feasibility of implementation of the system in further large-scale prospective studies and clinical rou-
tine will also be addressed by Soft. developer. Analyses will be by systematic text condensation [22].
Quantitatively we will estimate whether the addition of algorithm-based serial EEG assessment is
likely to strengthen clinicians’ trust and accuracy in outcome predictions and whether it may affect
WLST decisions compared to today’s standard. This will be done by comparing actual clinical deci-
sions vs. retrospective consensus evaluation using the additional data from the serial EEGs.
Task 3.2: AI framework for early prediction of time to event
An AI framework is designed that can learn to find distinguishable patterns for both awakening and
non-awakening patients from the serial EEGs collected in Task 3.1 to predict time-to-event (awaken-
ing or non-awakening). In this task, we will expand the AI model from WP1, 2 to predict probabilities
of patient awakening or mortality across various time intervals (e.g., 24, 48, or 72 hours). Temporal
markers will be transformed into time-based probability distributions, serving as labels to fine-tune
the AI model from WP1, 2. This approach compels the AI model to discover relevant patterns across
data modalities and distinguish distinctive characteristics within the learned features of both groups.
Expected results and deliverables: D3.1: Establish feasibility of introducing automated serial EEG as-
sessments in future prospective studies and clinical practice (M30); D3.2:improve the rule-based EEG algo-
rithm from WP1 and WP2 (M36); 3 Journal papers (Critical Care Medicine, Resuscitation-Elsevier, JAMIA).