WP2: Extend multi-grading rule-based assessment scheme for multi-modal scenarios;
Leader: Nakstad Contributors: Lundqvist, Sunde, Qadir, Nesaragi; Personnel: Postdoc, Ph.D.,
Nurse
Aims and Objectives: A retrospective study using the NORCAST database is designed in collab-
oration with Nurse to yield an automated multi-grading rule-based EEG assessment similar to WP1
but extended for multi-modal scenarios using a model combining EEG pattern recognition, NSE at
24, 48 and 72 hrs, and clinical variables like GCS, PLR, and corneal reflexes.
Tasks: Establish a Project-specific multi-modal database and develop multi-modal AI models
relevant for prognostication
Task 2.1 First, a project-specific EEG dataset will be established by combining rudimentary informa-
tion on sedation (yes/no) and HMEP annotated using the SCORE nomenclature adapting data from
NORCAST. Task 2.2 A similar design of three AI models is carried out as in WP1. Next, we map
the above multi-level graded labeling with four groups to binary prognostication outcome (good vs
poor). Here, the EEG modality approach described in WP1 will be extended to a multimodal frame-
work incorporating the additional data sources. Each data modality will represent different aspects
of neurological function in the TN architecture. The EEG data will continue to be processed and
tokenized as previously outlined, while the additional modalities will be encoded as supplementary
input features. These inputs will be synchronized with the EEG segments based on the alignment
and relevance to the clinical condition being studied. To handle the multimodal inputs, the AM within
the TN will be extended to simultaneously focus on intra-modality (e.g., EEG-specific patterns) and
inter-modality interactions (e.g., relationships between EEG signals and clinical variables). This will
involve designing specialized heads within the multi-head AM of TN, where some heads are ded-
icated to identifying correlations within individual modalities, while others focus on cross-modality
interactions. By customizing the AM in this manner, the TN will be equipped to capture complex,
high-dimensional relationships across the different data types. Task 2.3 Similar steps relevant to
clinical advisory on the model development and internal validation will be followed as in WP1. In
addition, comparison between the single-modality (EEG-only) and the multimodal model will be con-
ducted by evaluating their performance on the same classification tasks. We will assess the models
using accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score metrics. The goal of multi-modal prognostication is
to use additional information from other modalities to validate EEG assessments. This information
6
can serve as a secondary voting scheme to further enhance/guide the EEG reliability/assessment in
neuro-prognostication.
Expected results and deliverables: D2.1: Project-specific database (M18); D2.2: Multi-grading assess-
ment scheme for multi-modal scenarios (M30); and D2.3: Improve the rule-based EEG algorithm from WP1
using additional information from other modalities(M36). Target: 1 congress (ISICEM); 2 Journal Papers
(IEEE-JBHI, Physiological Measurement)